DOCSP-48893 Add get started with Mongoose tutorial (#1138)
mongodb/docs-node: source/integrations/mongoose-get-started.txt

- Buffer
- Boolean
- Mixed
- ObjectId
- Array
- Decimal128
- Map

Models
~~~~~~

Models take your schema and apply it to each document in its collection.  Models
are responsible for all document interactions such as create, read, update, and
delete (CRUD) operations.

.. tip::

   The first argument you pass to the model is the singular form of your
   collection name. Mongoose automatically changes this to the plural form,
   transforms it to lowercase, and uses that for the database collection name.

The following example shows how to declare a model named ``Blog`` that uses the
``blog`` schema:

.. literalinclude:: /includes/integrations/mongoose-model-example.js
   :language: javascript
   :dedent:

In the preceding example, ``Blog`` translates to the ``blogs`` collection in
MongoDB.

Prerequisites
-------------

Before you begin this tutorial, perform the following actions:

- Set up a MongoDB Atlas account and configure a cluster that is M0 or higher.
  To view instructions, see the :atlas:`Get Started with Atlas
  </getting-started>` guide.
- Install `Node.js <https://nodejs.org/en/download>`__ {+min-node-version+} or later.

Set Up Your Environment
-----------------------

> This tutorial uses npm to install dependencies and nodemon to run the code

Reviewer: `npm` is installed when you install Node.js, so I'm taking that out. I'll add the link and keep the instructions for `nodemon`.

   .. output::
      :language: console
      :visible: false

      Deleted One Blog: { acknowledged: true, deletedCount: 1 }

To delete multiple articles, you can add the following code:

.. io-code-block::
   :copyable:

   .. input:: /includes/integrations/mongoose-get-started-blogSchema.js
      :language: javascript
      :start-after: start-delete-many
      :end-before: end-delete-many

   .. output::
      :language: console
      :visible: false

      Deleted Many Blogs: { acknowledged: true, deletedCount: 4 }

.. _node-mongoose-get-started-helper-methods:

Helper Methods
--------------

Mongoose includes several helper methods that are abstracted from regular
MongoDB methods. In this section, you can find examples of some of these
methods. These methods are not used specifically in this tutorial, but they are
helpful to reference when getting started with Mongoose.

exists()
~~~~~~~~

The ``exists()`` method returns either null or the ``ObjectId`` of a document that
matches the provided query. The following is an example of matching an article
based on the ``author`` field:

.. code-block:: javascript

   const blog = await Blog.exists({ author: 'Jess Garcia' });

>    console.log(blog);

Reviewer: Since these are Mongoose methods, I just added links to the Mongoose API docs.

   :language: javascript
   :start-after: start-blogSchema
   :end-before: end-blogSchema
   :dedent:

In Mongoose, when you include validation on a field, you must pass an object as
its value. 

..  tip::

    When you use schemas with Mongoose, ``value: String`` is the same as
    ``value: {type: String}``.

You can use several validation methods with Mongoose. For example, you can set
``required`` to true on any fields that you want to require.

You can also validate the type and the formatting. In the preceding code, the
``slug`` field is defined as a ``string`` that is always in ``lowercase``. This
validation takes the slug input and converts it to lowercase before saving the
document to the database.

For the ``createdAt`` date field, you can set the default by using an arrow function.
This field is also specified to be impossible to change later by setting
``immutable`` to ``true``.

.. note::

   Validators only run on the ``create()`` and ``save()`` methods.

Multiple Schemas
----------------

Now that you have validation on your blog schema, and the author field is
``required``, you must update ``index.js`` to include the author. To do this,

> you can create a separate schema.

Reviewer 2: Similar to my earlier comment - this intro paragraph doesn't make as much sense when not in the context of a stepped tutorial. For this one I think it makes sense not to be in a tutorial though, so maybe just a rewording to make it more of a general intro paragraph would be helpful

   :language: javascript
   :dedent:

To reference this new user model in the blog schema, update the ``Blog.js`` file
to include the following code:

.. code-block:: javascript

   import mongoose from 'mongoose';
   const { Schema, SchemaTypes, model } = mongoose;

   const blogSchema = new Schema({
   ...
   author: {
     type: SchemaTypes.ObjectId,
     ref: 'User',
     required: true,
   },
   ...,
   comments: [{
     user: {
      type: SchemaTypes.ObjectId,
      ref: 'User',
      required: true,
     },
    content: String,
    votes: Number
   }];
  });
  ...

The preceding code sets the ``author`` and ``comments.user`` to ``SchemaTypes.ObjectId`` and
adds a ``ref``, or reference, to the user model. Be sure to destructure ``SchemaTypes``
from Mongoose at the top of the file below the import statement.

To use the new user model in your application, go to the ``index.js`` file. Add
the following code to the top of the file to import the user model:

.. literalinclude:: /includes/integrations/mongoose-get-started-multiple-schemas.js
   :language: javascript
   :start-after: start-user-import
   :end-before: end-user-import

> Since you added field validation to the blog schema, the previous code to

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Because you added field validation to the blog schema, the previous code to
```

        __v: 0
      }

The preceding code adds a ``users`` collection with the ``blogs`` collection in
the MongoDB database. This code adds the required ``author`` field and sets its
value to the ``user._id``. 

To add the values of the ``name`` and ``email`` fields to the ``author`` field
for the article, you can use the Mongoose ``populate()`` method. Add the
following code to ``index.js`` to populate this data:

.. io-code-block::
   :copyable:

   .. input:: /includes/integrations/mongoose-get-started-multiple-schemas.js
      :language: javascript
      :start-after: start-populate-author
      :end-before: end-populate-author

   .. output::
      :language: console
      :visible: false

      Article Populated: {
        _id: new ObjectId('...'),
        title: 'Awesome Post!',
        slug: 'awesome-post',
        published: false,
        author: {
          _id: new ObjectId('...'),
          name: 'Jess Garica',
          email: 'jgarcia@email.com',
          __v: 0
        },
        content: 'This is the best post ever',
        tags: [ 'featured', 'announcement' ],
        createdAt: 2025-05-15T18:04:28.590Z,
        comments: [],
        __v: 0
      }

> This populates the data for the ``author`` field in the data for this article.
> Mongoose uses the MongoDB ``$lookup`` method to do this under the hood.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This populates the data for the ``author`` field with the data for this article.
Mongoose uses the MongoDB ``$lookup`` method to populate the data automatically.
```

Middleware
----------

> In Mongoose, middleware are functions that run before, and, or during the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In Mongoose, middleware are functions that run before or during the
```

      :language: javascript
      :start-after: start-middleware-update
      :end-before: end-middleware-update

   .. output::
      :language: console
      :visible: false

      Article Updated: {
        _id: new ObjectId('...'),
        title: 'Updated Title',
        slug: 'awesome-post',
        published: false,
        author: new ObjectId('...'),
        content: 'This is the best post ever',
        tags: [ 'featured', 'announcement' ],
        createdAt: 2025-05-15T18:04:28.590Z,
        comments: [],
        __v: 0,
        updated: 2025-05-15T18:18:30.249Z
      }

When you run the application, the returned article includes an ``updated`` date.

Besides the ``pre()`` middleware function, Mongoose also offers a ``post()``
middleware function.

Resources and Next Steps
------------------------

You now have a sample project that uses Mongoose to perform CRUD operations on a
MongoDB collection. From here, you can choose to build on this project to
incorporate :ref:`Mongoose helper methods
<node-mongoose-get-started-helper-methods>` and build more complex queries.

To learn more about using Mongoose with MongoDB, see the `Mongoose documentation

> <https://mongoosejs.com/docs/guide.html>`__.

Reviewer 2: If not converting this into a stepped tutorial, I would suggest converting this to an "Additional Information" section

      Open your project in your preferred code editor. This tutorial uses ES
      Modules instead of CommonJS. You must add the ``module`` type to use ES
      Modules. Go to the ``package.json`` file and add the following code:

      .. code-block:: json

         ...
         "scripts": {
           "dev": "nodemon index.js"
         },
         "type": "module",
         ...

   .. step:: Connect to MongoDB.

      In the root level of your project, create a file named ``index.js`` and
      add the following code to the top of the file:

      .. code-block:: javascript

         import mongoose from 'mongoose';

         mongoose.connect("<connection string>")

      Replace the ``<connection string>`` placeholder with your MongoDB Atlas
      connection string. For more information on how to find your connection
      string, see the :atlas:`Connect to Your Cluster
      </tutorial/connect-to-your-cluster>` tutorial in the Atlas documentation. 

   .. step:: Create a schema and a model.

      Before you start adding and updating data in MongoDB, you must create a
      schema and model.

      With Mongoose, you create a schema model file for each schema that is

>       needed. First, create the a folder called ``model`` to put all your schema

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
      needed. First, create a folder called ``model`` to put all your schema
```

      files in, then create your first schema file called ``Blog.js``. Open this
      file and add the following code:  

      .. literalinclude:: /includes/integrations/mongoose-blogSchema.js
         :language: javascript
         :dedent:

   .. step:: Perform CRUD operations.

      You now have your first model and schema set up, and you can start
      inserting data into the database. The following sections show you how to
      perform CRUD operations using Mongoose.

      .. procedure::
         :style: connected

      Insert Data

>       ~~~~~~~~~~~

Reviewer 2: This section down through the Delete Data section needs be indented further to be under the procedure directive - currently it isn't rendering on the page

      
      .. note::

         When you use nodemon, the code runs every time you save a file. Saving will
         insert multiple articles into your database.

      Update Data
      ~~~~~~~~~~~

      To update data, you can directly edit the local object with Mongoose.
      Then, you can use the ``save()`` method to write the update to the
      database. 
      
      Add the following code to update the article you inserted in the
      previous section: 

      .. io-code-block::
         :copyable:

         .. input:: /includes/integrations/mongoose-get-started-blogSchema.js
            :language: javascript
            :start-after: start-update
            :end-before: end-update
      
         .. output::
            :language: console
            :visible: false

            Updated Article: {
               title: 'The Most Awesomest Post!!',
               slug: 'awesome-post',
               published: true,
               content: 'This is the best post ever',
               tags: [ 'featured', 'announcement' ],
               _id: new ObjectId('...'),
               comments: [],
               __v: 0
            }

      Find Data
      ~~~~~~~~~

>       To update a specific document, you can use the Mongoose ``findById()``

Reviewer 2: I think this should be "find" not "update" 
```suggestion
      To find a specific document, you can use the Mongoose ``findById()``
```

      ``ObjectId`` value for the document that you inserted previously:

      .. io-code-block::
         :copyable:

         .. input:: /includes/integrations/mongoose-get-started-blogSchema.js
            :language: javascript
            :start-after: start-find-by-id
            :end-before: end-find-by-id

         .. output::
            :language: console
            :visible: false

            Found Article by ID: {
               _id: new ObjectId('68261c9dae39e390341c367c'),
               title: 'The Most Awesomest Post!!',
               slug: 'awesome-post',
               published: true,
               content: 'This is the best post ever',
               tags: [ 'featured', 'announcement' ],
               comments: [],
               __v: 0
            }
      
      .. note::

         The Mongoose ``exec()`` function is an option of the ``findById()``
         method that returns a promise. To learn more about working with
         promises and Mongoose, see the `Promises guide
         <https://mongoosejs.com/docs/promises.html>`__ in the Mongoose
         documentation. 
   
      Specify Document Fields
      ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

>       Like with the {+driver-short+}, you can use Mongoose to project only the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
      You can use Mongoose to project only the
```

               comments: [],
               __v: 0
            }

      Find Data
      ~~~~~~~~~~

      To find a specific document, you can use the Mongoose ``findById()``
      method to get a document by its ``ObjectId``.

      Add following code to your ``index.js`` file to find a specific article by
      its ``ObjectId``, replacing the ``<object id>`` placeholder with the
      ``ObjectId`` value for the document that you inserted previously:

      .. io-code-block::
         :copyable:

         .. input:: /includes/integrations/mongoose-get-started-blogSchema.js
            :language: javascript
            :start-after: start-find-by-id
            :end-before: end-find-by-id

         .. output::
            :language: console
            :visible: false

            Found Article by ID: {
               _id: new ObjectId('68261c9dae39e390341c367c'),
               title: 'The Most Awesomest Post!!',
               slug: 'awesome-post',
               published: true,
               content: 'This is the best post ever',
               tags: [ 'featured', 'announcement' ],
               comments: [],
               __v: 0
            }
      
      .. note::

>          The Mongoose ``exec()`` function is an option of the ``findById()``

Reviewer: Clarified.

   .. step:: Connect to MongoDB

      In the root level of your project, create a file named ``index.js`` and
      add the following code to the top of the file:

      .. code-block:: javascript

         import mongoose from 'mongoose';

         mongoose.connect("<connection string>")

      Replace the ``<connection string>`` placeholder with your MongoDB Atlas
      connection string. For more information on how to find your connection
      string, see the :atlas:`Connect to Your Cluster
      </tutorial/connect-to-your-cluster>` tutorial in the Atlas documentation. 

   .. step:: Create a schema and a model

      Before you start adding and updating data in MongoDB, you must create a
      schema and model.

      With Mongoose, you create a schema model file for each schema that is
      needed. First, create a folder called ``model`` to put all your schema
      files in, then create your first schema file called ``Blog.js``. Open this
      file and add the following code:  

      .. literalinclude:: /includes/integrations/mongoose-blogSchema.js
         :language: javascript
         :dedent:
      

>       This schema enables a ``timestamps`` option, which adds Mongoose-manged

Reviewer 3: Minor typo "Mongoose-manged" -> "mongoose-managed"

Helper Methods
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Mongoose includes several helper methods that are abstracted from regular
MongoDB methods. In this section, you can find examples of some of these
methods. These methods are not used specifically in this tutorial, but they are
helpful to reference when getting started with Mongoose.

exists()
~~~~~~~~

The ``exists()`` method returns either ``null`` or the first document that
matches the provided query. The following is an example of matching an article
based on the ``author`` field:

.. code-block:: javascript

   const blog = await Blog.exists({ author: 'Jess Garcia' });
   console.log(blog);

For more information, see the `Model.exists()
<https://mongoosejs.com/docs/api/model.html#Model.exists()>`__ section of the
Mongoose API documentation.

where()
~~~~~~~

The ``where()`` method allows you to chain and build complex queries. 

The following is an example of performing a find operation by using
``findOne()`` with a plain query object and the equivalent
query with the ``where()`` method:

.. code-block:: javascript

   const blogFind = await Blog.findOne({ author: "Jess Garcia" });
   console.log(blogFind);

>    const blogWhere = await Blog.where("author").equals("Jess Garcia");

Reviewer 3: While this code does work as written, I wanted to repeat my previous comment that `Blog.find().where('author').equals('Jess Garcia')` is more idiomatic.
